- The Java EE Security API is a new API introduced
in Java EE 8 that simplifies and standardizes
the security model.
The Security API was introduced as part of JSR 375.
It was meant to build a better security model
that is portable across several Java EE technologies.
The API takes an annotation-based approach,
eliminating the need for configuration to be placed
in a web.xml file moving forward.
Prior to the Security API, container providers
defined their own implementations which contain
differing concepts and terminology.
This made it difficult for developers
to implement security.
The changes introduced in the Security API
allow security to be applied uniformly
across containers for servlets and EJB.
The first new interface introduced by the Security API
that we'll cover is the HttpAuthenticationMechanism.
It defines an interface for building authentication
mechanisms that can be deployed using CDI.
So, basically, this is a component
that confirms the identity of a user,
given their provided credentials.
Within the Security API, there are three implementations
provided out of the box that can be leveraged by developers.
If none of the implementations are sufficient,
developers can build their own implementation
of the interface.
The three built-in implementations
of the HttpAuthenticationMechanism support basic, form,
and a custom form authentication mechanism.
On the interface, we find three methods,
the most important of which is validateRequest,
which is used to authenticate the caller.
Another interface introduced by the Security API
is the IdentityStore.
The IdentityStore provides a uniform approach
to working with stores of user credentials.
So, typically we store credentials in something like
a database or an LDAP,
and the IdentityStore abstracts
those user credential stores.
The final major interface introduced
by the Java EE Security API is the SecurityContext.
It provides convenient access to information
about the authenticated user within servlets and EJBs.
Currently, servlets and EJBs have inconsistent
approaches to obtaining the authenticated user
and determining if they have specific roles.
This inconsistency is remediated by the SecurityContext.
Methods on the SecurityContext interface allow
application code to retrieve user principles,
check access to web resources,
and determine if a caller has a particular role.
Next, we're going to take a look
at these interfaces in action.